- Feature Name: `rust_formal_spec`
- Start Date: 2018-01-13
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- Rust Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary

This RFC aims to develop a formal and computable specification for the Rust
language and Standard Library as well as a framework for the extensible
verification of Rust code. This RFC will address an extension of the borrow and
trait/type checkers as well as a system for 
[Hoare Logic](umathur3.web.engr.illinois.edu/documents/slides/hoare.pdf)
referred to from here on out as the Contract Checker.

Currently, we lack a standardised specification for the Rust language and as a
result attempts at developing contracts and reasoning about code have been
unergonomic and extraordinarily fragile. Here we propose a formal and
computable specification modelled off of the current implementation of the
`rustc` compiler and a transition plan designed to limit interference in the
continued development of the rest of the Rust ecosystem.

# Motivation

Current assurances for the Rust toolchain are largely limited to relatively
strong memory safety and a lack of undefined behaviour. Additionally,
assertions exist to prevent the execution of certain paths and provide strong
hints to the compiler as to the intended operation of the program. These
assurances are undermined by the existence of the `unsafe` keyword and the lack
of formal specifications surrounding its use. 

Developing a formal specification for the language, even if only a shallow one,
would allow developers to effectively reason about `unsafe` code. This would
allow developers to reasonably guarantee that at the end of an `unsafe` block
the program is left in a consistent state and can be executed from safe code
without inducing undefined behaviour or violating the existing memory safety
guarantees.

Additionally, by developing a formal specification developers would be able to
codify and enforce additional properties beyond the existing assurances as
contracts embedded in traits and types. This moves Rust into the domain of
formally defined programming languages and high assurance systems software
which are very closely related to the original intent of the Rust language.

# Guide-level explanation

A `manual` block is a scoped block that allows the use of `unsafe` features but
requires the manual verification of all properties and contracts that would be
enforced in a safe block. This guarantees that code calling a `manual` block
maintains the assurances enforced prior to calling the `manual` block.

For backwards-compatibility reasons `unsafe` blocks maintain their original
purpose as unchecked code that is assumed to leave the program in a consistent
state. `unsafe` blocks should be avoided and `manual` blocks should be used
instead where possible.

Verifying assurances are upheld in a `manual` block can be done either
internally with newly introduced `proof` macros or externally using a proof
assistant such as [Coq](https://coq.inria.fr/), 
[Lean](https://leanprover.github.io/), or 
[Agda](https://wiki.portal.chalmers.se/agda/pmwiki.php). Proof assistants can
be accessed by including their respective crates in `Cargo.toml`. These crates
export the internal representation of the block in question, goals required to
fulfill all assurances, and proof scripts to the proof assistant as well as
report back whether the theorem prover succeeded.

Annotations can be used to assign names to blocks of code and reduce the
fragility of interfacing with a proof assistant. Alternatively, `assert` macros
can be used to assume the properties are upheld. This is useful when the
sections in question are still under heavy development or would otherwise
heavily interfere with the development process. 

Contracts are sets of additional assurances encoded in `trait` definitions that
must be upheld throughout the lifetime of the corresponding `impl`
implementations. Contracts encode properties based on Hoare Logic such as
preconditions, postconditions, and invariants. Verifying contract properties
can be done in the same manner as with verifying assurances inside of `manual`
blocks. Objects with trait contracts should minimise the exposure of
implementation details to limit the scope of verification to `impl`.

Contracts are used where possible in the core language and Standard Library to
guarantee that implementations conform to the expected behaviour of the
specified traits.

# Reference-level explanation

This RFC introduces the `manual` block, `proof` macros, and contract `trait`
definitions as well as an entirely new query module to the build system to
handle the newly introduced contract traits. This RFC also makes modifications
to the Rust Language Server and outlines a transition plan for the adoption of
these features in the Standard Library.

## Manual Block

The new `manual` keyword is introduced and acts like the `unsafe` keyword with
the exception that the `manual` keyword provides a mechanism for demonstrating
a contract(such as safe behaviour) is upheld while the `unsafe` keyword simply
asserts that the contract is upheld. 

The primary use will be in replacing `unsafe` blocks where with a few hints the
various checkers would be able to generate proofs for the goals implemented by
a contract. Any trait, function, or type that contains `proof` macros will be
implicitly cast to `manual`. Internally, the intent is that `manual` replaces
`unsafe` in most circumstances. 

## Proof Macros

These macros issue directives to the borrow and [contract](#contracts) checkers
that provide the information necessary to complete the proofs that the checkers
could not solve automatically. These include generating specific subgoals,
adding additional context(hints) to the checkers, and annotating semantic
elements.

Theorem prover plugins allow the exposure of the environment and goals to
external theorem provers for the solving of non-trivial goals. The theorem
prover interface will be provided with a reference Coq plugin.

If there is a reasonable assurance that certain conditions hold true, `assert`
macros can also be used to simply assume a goal or subgoal is valid. This has
the unique benefit of encoding guarantees that are made across the Foreign
Function Interface (FFI). This allows for more solid guarantees near the FFI as
the specifics of each function can be encoded. 

## Contracts

Contracts implement complete Hoare Logic including pre-, post-, and
invariant-conditions. Utilising a 
[Satisfiability Modulo Theory (SMT) Solver](https://leodemoura.github.io/files/oregon08.pdf), 
trivial goals can be solved automatically however utilisation of theorem prover
plugins or `proof` macros should allow the completion of any solvable goal.

## Rust Language Server

By adding type/trait, borrow, and contract checker information to the Rust
Language Server (RLS), theorem prover plugins and editors can access goal
information. This allows integration with the native interactive theorem prover
interfaces like CoqIDE and improved debugging with the full breadth of
debugging utilities for Rust and the interactive theorem prover of choice.

## Standard Library Transition Proposal

As this RFC entails an extraordinary change on behalf of the core language and
Standard Library development teams, a transition plan was developed to minimise
the immediate disruption to the development process.

### Stage 1: Develop Core Features

As stated, this stage is the primary development of all of the features
previously specified in this RFC. This stage will retain most of the fragility
and ergonomics issues common in other verification attempts however these
growing pains will be restricted to solely the developers working on this RFC.
Once the primary features of this RFC are working, then stage 2 can
begin.

### Stage 2: Implement Assertions

The 
[Rust Language Reference](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/reference/), and
[Rust Standard Library Documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/std/index.html)
contain the most complete specification of expected behaviour. 

Instead of attempting to prove all of this, `assert` macros will be inserted to
sufficiently document the expected behaviour. This will be a slow process
however the difficulty in using the features specified in this RFC should
reduce significantly as this stage nears completion. Additionally, this stage
is likely to expose some bugs in the implementation. Even after all of the
assertions are added, the transition will likely remain at this stage until
development has sufficiently stabilised and verification work can be done
without having to be rewritten every other release. 

### Stage 3: Verification of the Standard Library

Once code churn has dropped below a reasonable level, work will begin to
systematically convert `assert` macros into completed goals and proofs using
the tools previously specified in this RFC. Like with stage 2,
progress will proceed very slowly. Work in this stage will take upwards of 10
years to complete. 

# Drawbacks

This RFC adds a significant burden on the language and Standard Library
developers to maintain up to date contract traits however the burden is
minimised where possible and mostly delayed until the language has stabilised.
Additionally, this RFC adds an entire additional section of compiler operation
that would leave a measurable decrease in compiler performance. However, this
feature may permit more aggressive optimisations and as discussed in the
[motivation](#motivation), this feature is essential for high assurance
software and first-class support is vital for industry adoption.

# Rationale and alternatives

Instead of in the core language, the features in this RFC could be implemented
in a crate or plugin and as shown in [the following section](#other-prior-art), this
has been attempted at least twice already. Unless these features are
implemented with full first-class support like the borrow and trait checkers,
they will remain extremely fragile and difficult to use. 

To quote the original Rust website, "Rust is a systems programming language
that runs blazingly fast, prevents segfaults, and guarantees thread safety". If
Rust is to be adopted by the industry as a systems language, it will have to be
capable of delivering the same guarantees that other systems languages can
offer with at least as much ease.

As for the mechanics of the contract checker, a full blown type system such as
[Calculus of Constructions](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/calculus+of+constructions),
[Homotopy Type Theory](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/homotopy+type+theory), or
the like could be used instead. The contract checker however, benefits from a
weaker system by being much easier for automated theorem provers to manipulate
than the more robust systems.

# Prior art

## Ada SPARK

The primary source of inspiration for this RFC comes from the
[SPARK](https://www.adacore.com/about-spark) subset of Ada and the associated
tooling. The latest revision, SPARK 2014 includes a majority of modern Ada and
can statically verify that any program written in the dialect terminates and is incapable
of violating any specified property or contract at any point of program
operation for any reason. These properties include features already included in
Rust such as index access violations and illegal arithmetic operations (divide
by zero, over/underflow) as well as others like type bounds and hoare logic
conditions. 

SPARK's tooling also tightly integrates with Proof Assistants like Coq when
SPARK's automated methods fail to produce a solution.

These features have made SPARK a mainstay in high assurance systems such as
military grade equipment and flight systems.

## Rust Compiler

Heavy inspiration was drawn from the trait checker
([Polonius](https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/polonius)) and the borrow
checker ([Chalk](https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/chalk)). Both are heavily
based on Prolog and operate on a query system. While these systems lack formal
proofs behind them, the [Rustbelt](#rustbelt) project is working to provide a
formal guarantee of these systems.

## Rustbelt

The [Rustbelt project](http://plv.mpi-sws.org/rustbelt/) and the
[Rust Verification working group](https://rust-lang-nursery.github.io/wg-verification/) 
are pre-existing projects attempting to formalise the Rust language. These
projects focus on the formalisation of the memory model and borrow checker.
Where these projects focus on making sure that the model is correct, this RFC
is primarily focusing instead on making a standard that conforms to the
existing implementation and providing a safe way to guarantee that the memory
model is not violated.

## Other Prior Art

- [SMACK: LLVM based verification](https://github.com/smackers/smack)
- [Electrolysis: Rust to Lean (theorem prover) transpiler](https://github.com/Kha/electrolysis)
- [An axiomatic basis for computer programming, Hoare, C.A.R. 1969](https://web.archive.org/web/20160304013345/http://www.spatial.maine.edu/~worboys/processes/hoare%20axiomatic.pdf)

# Unresolved questions

- How much of the borrow checker should be exposed and which additional memory
  properties should be manually enforceable?
- Which SMT solver should the contract checker use?
- What syntax should be used for the contracts and `proof` macros?
- Will the `assert` macros need redefinition to work with this RFC?
- How much of a regression will the contract checker add to `rustc` performance
  and should disabling the contract checker for non-debug builds be permitted?
- Can the compiler be modified to operate in a lightweight mode assuming all
  contract code is valid and does this result in more efficient optimisations?

# Future possibilities

Having added manual hints for providing memory guarantees with `unsafe` code
and extended the compiler to support Hoare logic through the contract checker,
the next logical step would be to unify the borrow checker, trait/type checker,
and contract checker. As both the borrow and trait/type checker are heavily
based on Prolog and the contract checker is based on an SMT solver, integrating
them all under the contract checker is a realistic possibility. Whether this
would provide sufficient benefit to be worth the additional effort will have to
be explored.

Additionally, it may be possible to share guarantees and contracts across the
FFI with sufficient tooling and support. The exposure of `proof` macros should
allow external guarantees to be imported during compilation and the finalised
guarantees should now be exportable if a crate was to add support for parsing
and transpiling said guarantees.
